[[_TOC_]]

# Group Exercise

## Outline

Instead of creating a VM with a webserver, Azure has the ability to directly serve web content from Blob storage. This makes use of of the **Storage Account** service in Azure.
The task here is create an appropriate storage account and add some dummy static content that can be served up e.g. a HTML page.

## Exercise - Part 1 (Manually)

* We would like you to create a Resource Group with the name rg-storage-challenge-{teamname}-{name}
  * Within this resource group we would like you to create a **Standard** storage account.
  * The storage should be named appropriately for your Team. NB. Storage Accounts must be globally Unique!
  * The storage Type should be **Standard** / **V2** type
  * The Storage should be **Locally Redundant (LRS)**
  * The Networking options should be configured to be **Publicly** Available.
  * Allow Blob Public Access - Should be Enabled.
  * Tags should also be applied to the created resources. You can obtain the ones to use from the table in [Exercise 1](./1.%20Deploy%20an%20Azure%20VM%20from%20Portal.MD)

<br>

* Within the Storage Account Create a Container. You can name how you see fit.
  * Set the container to be Public

<br>

* Add a file to the container
* Verify that you can access the file from your web browser using the **Public** endpoint for your storage (Hint if you click on your file in the azure portal it will show you the details of the public endpoint).

Delete the Resource Group when you have finished.

## Exercise - Part 2 (Via Terraform)

Using the provided starter template: `exercises/terraform-starter-example`. See if you can automate the same steps using Terraform.
All the documentation you need is available [here](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/azurerm/latest/docs/resources/storage_blob) and there are some useful links in the comments of the template.

* The container name should use variables for your team/name.
* You *should* be able to upload a file via terraform
* See if you can output some information about your resources using terraform outputs
* See if you can pass the values of the variables on the cli or by using a `tfvars file`


Note: Pay Attention to all the parameters which can be set. Particularly the Defaults in the documentation. 
Also please speak to the tutors if you get stuck! We are there to help!